Barceloneta based Classic UI theme (#1516)
plone/documentation: docs/classic-ui/theming/barceloneta.md

# Classic UI theming based on Barceloneta

Barceloneta is the default enabled theme for Plone Classic UI.

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-theme-package-label)=

## Create a Classic UI theme addon package

Create a Classic UI theme addon with `plonecli`:

```shell
plonecli create addon plonetheme.themebasedonbarceloneta
```

> Then change the working directory into the created package and add the

Reviewer: Please use one sentence per line. Docs are not code. This makes it easier to review and make suggestions, if needed, and avoids the need to rewrap if it gets edited.

```suggestion
Then change the working directory into the created package and add the basic theme structure with the following command.
```

> basic theme structure with:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```shell
cd plonetheme.themebasedonbarceloneta
plonecli add theme_barceloneta
```

Give your theme a name and optionally commit the changes.

> After that the theming structure is setup and ready for customization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that the theming structure is set up and ready for customization.
```

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-theme-structure-label)=

## Theme structure

All the theming relevant files are now located inside `src/plonetheme/themebasedonbarceloneta/theme/`:

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text
````

./src/plonetheme/themebasedonbarceloneta/theme/
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon-114x114-precomposed.png
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon-144x144-precomposed.png
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon-57x57-precomposed.png
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon-72x72-precomposed.png
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon-precomposed.png
├── barceloneta-apple-touch-icon.png
├── barceloneta-favicon.ico
├── index.html
├── manifest.cfg
├── package.json
├── preview.png
├── rules.xml
├── scss
│   ├── _custom.scss
│   ├── _maps.scss
│   ├── _variables.scss
│   └── theme.scss
├── styles
│   ├── theme.css
│   └── theme.min.css
└── tinymce-templates
    ├── README.rst
    ├── card-group.html
    └── list.html
```

> 

Reviewer: Let's convert this into a more compact definition list, instead of a bunch of headings with sections, which will also make it more a part of the current section. If a definition has more than one sentence, then indent them to align with the start of the first sentence. Example:

```
`index.html`
:   Basic HTML structure for the site layout.

`manifest.cfg`
:   Basic theme configuration for the backend.
```

### `index.html`

-   Basic HTML structure for the site layout.

### `manifest.cfg`

-   Basic theme configuration for the backend.

### `package.json`

-   npm package configuration which defines all requirements for theming
    with barceloneta.

### `rules.xml`

> -   Diazo rules which translate the `index.html` and fills it with content

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Diazo rules which translate the `index.html` and fill it with content from the backend.
```

>     from the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### `scss/_custom.scss`

-   Custom SCSS rules for your theme.

### `scss/_maps.scss`

-   Override Bootstrap mapping variables here.

### `scss/_variables.scss`

> -   Override Bootstrap and/or Barceloneta variables here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Override Bootstrap and Barceloneta variables here.
```

### `scss/theme.scss`

> -   Base theme file which follows "Option B" of customizing Bootstrap imports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   Base theme file which follows "Option B" of customizing Bootstrap imports to enable injections of custom variables and maps.
```

>     to enable custom variable and map injections. Note that the order of these imports is mandatory to ensure overriding the defaults. See https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/customize/sass/#importing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Note that the order of these imports is mandatory to ensure overriding the defaults.
    See https://getbootstrap.com/docs/5.3/customize/sass/#importing.
```

### `styles/theme.css[.min]`

-   Compiled CSS styles.

### `tinymce-templates/*.html`

-   HTML snippets for the TinyMCE `template` plugin.

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-npm-package-label)=

## npm package

> To compile the SCSS code you have to install Node.js (v16+) and the required dependencies with `npm`. Then run the package script `build` inside the `theme/` folder:

Reviewer: One sentence per line.
```suggestion
To compile the SCSS code you have to install Node.js (v16+) and the required dependencies with `npm`.
Then run the package script `build` inside the `theme/` folder:
```

```shell
npm install
npm run build
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-compiling-theme-resources-label)=

## Compiling theme resources

```

During theme development you can run:

```shell
npm run watch
```

this compiles the SCSS resources on the fly when you change something inside

> the `scss/` folder.

Reviewer: Does this also allow the developer to preview their changes in the browser? If so, please mention it.

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-customize-components-label)=

## Customize Bootstrap and Barceloneta components

The base `scss/theme.scss` file provides all imports of the dependent Bootstrap
and Barceloneta resources to build the default Classic UI theme.
As a convenience `bobtemplates.plone` has created three files to customize
variables, maps and custom SCSS code.

> ```

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```text
````

scss/_custom.scss
scss/_maps.scss
scss/_variables.scss
```

> ### SCSS and root variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-scss-and-root-variables-label)=

### SCSS and root variables
```

> To set a custom font you define the font variables in `scss/_variables.scss`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To set a custom font, you define the font variables in `scss/_variables.scss`:
```

```scss
$font-family-sans-serif: Tahoma, Calimati, Geneva, sans-serif;
$font-family-serif: Georgia, Norasi, serif;
```

> This will override the default values from barceloneta.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This will override the default values from Barceloneta.
```

> ### Properties

Reviewer: To avoid duplicate heading at the end of the file.

```suggestion
### SCSS and properties
```

> Same procedure if you want to disable rounded corners for borders:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example shows how to disable rounded corners for borders.
```

```scss
$enabled-rounded: false;
```

> A complete list of all properties see {ref}`classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-default-variables-properties-label`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A complete list of all properties see {ref}`classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-default-variables-and-properties-label`.
```

> ### Maps

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-maps-label)=

### Maps
```

> Maps are key value pairs to make CSS generation easier. As an example this is the workflow colors map:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Maps are key/value pairs to make CSS generation easier.
As an example, the following example shows the workflow colors map:
```

```scss
$state-colors: (
  "draft":                          $state-draft-color,
  "pending":                        $state-pending-color,
  "private":                        $state-private-color,
  "internal":                       $state-internal-color,
  "internally-published":           $state-internally-published-color,
) !default;
```

> If you have a custom workflow state you can add your state color to the default map. Just add the following to `scss/_maps.scss`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have a custom workflow state, you can add your state color to the default map in `scss/_maps.scss` as shown below.
```

```scss
$custom-state-colors: (
  "my-custom-state-id": "#ff0000";
);

// Merge the maps
$state-colors: map-merge($state-colors, $custom-colors);
```

> ### Custom CSS code

Reviewer: ```suggestion

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-custom-css-code-label)=

### Custom CSS code
```

> Inside the file `theme/_custom.scss` you can write all your custom CSS/Sass code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inside the file `theme/_custom.scss`, you can write all your custom CSS/Sass code to adapt the theme to your needs.
```

> to adapt the theme to your needs. Feel free to add more files inside the `scss/` folder to make your code more readable. Don't forget to import your custom files in `scss/theme.scss`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to add more files inside the `scss/` folder to make your code more readable.
Don't forget to import your custom files in `scss/theme.scss`.
```

> (classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-default-variables-properties-label)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-default-variables-and-properties-label)=
```

# Classic UI theming based on Barceloneta

Barceloneta is the default enabled theme for Plone Classic UI.

(classic-ui-theming-barceloneta-theme-package-label)=

> ## Create a Classic UI theme addon package

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Create a Classic UI theme add-on package
```
